Kib (#430)
freebsd/freebsd-quarterly: 2021q4/vdso.adoc

== VDSO on amd64

Contact: Konstantin Belousov <kib@FreeBSD.org>  

VDSO AKA Virtual Dynamic Shared Object is a shared object (in the

> common speak, dynamic library) that is injected into the executed

Author: executed as created by combination of actions from execve(2) and the startup part of dynamic linker

image by common efforts from kernel and dynamic linker.  It does not
exists on disk as a standalone .so, and there are no instructions in
the ELF format that cause the injection.  It is done by system to

> implement some functionality for the consumers.

Author: Probably 'consumers' can be replaced by the 'C runtime implementation'.  I will do this.

FreeBSD already has a lot of features that otherwise typically done
using VDSO (in Linux), but really not requiring that complication.
Main reason why it is possible is the often mentioned co-evolution of
the kernel and C runtime.  We can naturally introduce features that
require implementation both in kernel, and support in the userspace
parts, since FreeBSD is developed as the whole.  Surprisingly, it also
allows for kernel and dynamic linker to know much less (and not
enforce anything) about userspace consumers of interfaces.

For instance, syscall-less wall clock was implemented long time ago,

> by kernel providing time hands blob in the shared page, and C library

Author: time hands is the data structure that defines the current state of timecounter

> by kernel providing time hands blob in the shared page, and C library

Author: I took articles changes from the suggestion

knowing about the blob location and supported algorithms.  There is no
need for VDSO that interposes some libc symbols, or provides services

> that are named by known symbols to userspace.

Author: The 'symbols' term is crusial there

> that are named by known symbols to userspace.

Reviewer: Then I don't understand what you're trying to say because "named by symbols that userspace knows" and "have names known to userspace" mean exactly the same to me. If names aren't symbols, what are they?

> that are named by known symbols to userspace.

Author: Names are names, existence of name for something does not imply anything technically.  Symbol is the real construct that is observed and handled by software.

For instance, mentioned timehands do have name, we refer to them as 'timehands', but there is no symbol for it.

From the all years of experience with this pseudo-VDSO approach, the

> only feature that was arguably impossible to implement without

Author: impossible at all

> only feature that was arguably impossible to implement without

Reviewer: Then I'd get rid of "arguably".

> only feature that was arguably impossible to implement without

Author: I cannot exclude a possibility that the thing I considered impossible, can be done by somebody else.  But ok, I removed the word.

providing real VDSO, was the signal trampoline dwarf annotations, for
the benefit of stack unwinders.

When kernel delivers signal to userspace, it changes some key
registers (like instruction pointer, stack pointer, whatever is needed
by architecture), and pushes the saved image of whole usermode CPU
state (context) into user stack.  Then, the control is passed to the
small piece of code located on the shared page (signal trampoline),

> which calls into user function-handler, and on return from the handler

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which calls the user handler function and on return from the handler
```

> issues sigreturn(2) syscall to reload old context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
issues a sigreturn(2) syscall to reload the old context.
```

> From this description, it is clear that the state of the machine

Reviewer: Do you mean "stack state" here? Or is there more than that?

Author: I mean the architectural state of the CPU

during trampoline execution is quite different from the normal C
calling frames.  Unwinders that handle things like C++ exceptions,
Rust panics, or other similar mechanisms in specific language
runtimes, need to understand the specialness of the trampoline frame.
The current approach is to hardcode the detection of the trampoline,
e.g. by matching the instruction pointer against sysctl
kern.proc.sigtramp.

DWARF annotations are enough to provide the required information to

> unwinders to make trampoline frame not special anymore, but the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unwinders to make the trampoline frame not special anymore, but the
```

problem is that there is no way for unwinders to find the annotation

> without introducing even more speciality.  Or, we can inject VDSO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
without introducing even more specialness.  Instead, we can insert a VDSO
```

> which only purpose is to appear in enumeration of the dso's loaded

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that only serves to appear in the enumeration of DSOs loaded
```

> into process, either with dl_iterate_phdr(3) (in-process) or r_debug

Reviewer: ```suggestion
into the process, with either dl_iterate_phdr(3) (in-process) or r_debug
```

(remote), with PT_GNU_EH_FRAME header pointing to the root of DWARF
info.

> This is exactly what VDSO on FreeBSD does: it wraps signal trampoline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is exactly what the VDSO on FreeBSD does: it wraps signal trampoline
```

> bits and their DWARF annotation (.cfi) into shared object, which is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bits and their DWARF annotation (.cfi) into a shared object, which is
```

> put into shared page, and which is linked by rtld into set of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
put into the shared page and linked by rtld(1) into the set of
```

> preloaded objects on the image activation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
preloaded objects upon image activation.
```

> Efforts were made to strip as much as possible of unneeded structures

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Efforts were made to strip as many unneeded structures
```

> and paddings from the VDSO image, because it consumes space in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and as much padding as possible from the VDSO image, because it consumes space in the
```

shared page.  It was pushed as far as the common denominator of lld

> and ld.bfd allowed, with several tricks done by linker scripts, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and ld.bfd allowed, with several tricks done by linker scripts and
```

> some use of seemingly undocumented linker options.

Reviewer: Please clarify "seemingly undocumented". Do you mean "poorly documented", "undocumented", "obscure", or something else?

Author: I was able to find needed options by reading lld source code.

Reviewer: If they're not in the documentation, they're undocumented. No "seemingly" about it.

Author: I am not an expert in locating lld documentation.  The options I used might be explained somewhere, but I do not know the place.  I prefer a weaker statement there.

> We need at least two VDSOs for amd64, one 64bit for native binaries,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need at least two VDSOs for amd64: a 64-bit one for native binaries
```

> and one 32bit for ia32 binaries.  With the size of each VDSO around

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and a 32-bit one for ia32 binaries.  With the size of each VDSO around
```

> 1.5KB, it becomes really tight in the shared page, which needs space

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.5KB, space becomes really tight in the shared page, which needs space
```

> for other stuff as well, like timehands or random generator seeds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for other stuff as well, like timestamps or random generator seeds.
```
Maybe "other things"? Taste.

Author: I do not mind against 'other things', but it is timehands, not timestamps

Reviewer: > I do not mind against 'other things', but it is timehands, not timestamps

Do you mean hands as in an analog clock? https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/hand 1 b (1)?

Author: The terms we use is 'timehands', making an allusion to the hands of the round clock, yes.  See sys/kern/kern_tc.c:69.

Reviewer: > The terms we use is 'timehands', making an allusion to the hands of the round clock, yes. See sys/kern/kern_tc.c:69.

I'd explain it then, as many (perhaps most) people reading this won't be familiar enough with kernel sources to know that bit of FreeBSD jargon, or have the time and inclination to get that familiar with it.

> Build scripts assert that VDSOs do not grow larger than 2K; if they

Reviewer: Do you mean "check"  or "enforce" here?

Author: checks and fails the build if conditions are not met

Reviewer: > checks and fails the build if conditions are not met

I'd use "enforce" then.

> do, we need to extend shared page to become at least two shared pages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
do, we need to split the shared page into at least two shared pages.
```

Author: we cannot split one page into two, we can only extend 'shared page' from one two two VM pages

> Scripts also assert that VDSO are pure position-independent, not

Reviewer: Same re "check" or "enforce".

Reviewer: > Same re "check" or "enforce".

And "enforce" would be clearer here too given the above.
